_episodes/01-intro.md, before:

---
title: Python Fundamentals
teaching: 20
exercises: 5
questions:
- "What basic data types can I work with in Python?"
- "How can I create a new variable in Python?"
- "Can I change the value associated with a variable after I create it?"
objectives:
- "Assign values to variables."
keypoints:
- "Basic data types in Python include integers, strings, and floating-point numbers."
- "Use `variable = value` to assign a value to a variable in order to record it in memory."
- "Variables are created on demand whenever a value is assigned to them."
- "Use `print(something)` to display the value of `something`."
---

## Preparation

For this lesson we will begin using the Python programming language.  
For examples used in class:

1. Log onto HOPPER and create a new directory in your home directory called:
`swc-python`

2. Copy the following two files from `/home/pdirmeye/classes/clim680_2022/` to your new directory:
`python-novice-inflammation-code.zip`
`python-novice-inflammation-data.zip`

3. Unzip the two files
You should see two new folders called `data` and `code` in the `swc-python` directory

4. Load a Python module so that you will have access to the language and its interpreter. 
If you already have a Python environment set up, you may load/use that. 
If you do not or are unsure, you may run the following command:

~~~
$ module load python
~~~
{: .language-bash}

To start an interactive Python session, type:

~~~
$ python
~~~
{: .language-bash}

## Variables

Any Python interpreter can be used as a calculator:

~~~
3 + 5 * 4
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
23
~~~
{: .output}

This is fine, but not very interesting.
To do anything useful with data, we need to assign its value to a _variable_.
In Python, we can **assign** a value to a
**variable**, using the equals sign `=`.
For example, to assign value `60` to a variable `weight_kg`, we would execute:

~~~
weight_kg = 60
~~~
{: .language-python}

From now on, whenever we use `weight_kg`, Python will substitute the value we assigned to
it. In layman's terms, a variable is a name for a value.

In Python, variable names:

 - can include letters, digits, and underscores
 - cannot start with a digit
 - are **case sensitive**.

This means that, for example:
 - `weight1` is a valid variable name, whereas `1weight` is not.
 - `weight` and `Weight` are _different variables_.

## Types of data
Python knows various types of data. Three common ones are:

* integer numbers
* floating point numbers, and
* strings.

In the example above, variable `weight_kg` has an integer value of `60`.
To create a variable with a floating point value, we can execute:

~~~
weight_kg = 60.0
~~~
{: .language-python}

And to create a string, we surround the text with single or double quotes, for example:

~~~
weight_kg_text = 'weight in kilograms:'
~~~
{: .language-python}

## Using Variables in Python
To display the value of a variable to the screen in Python, we can use the `print` function:

~~~
print(weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
60.0
~~~
{: .output}

We can display multiple things at once using only one `print` command:

~~~
print(weight_kg_text, weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in kilograms: 60.0
~~~
{: .output}

Moreover, we can do arithmetic with variables right inside the `print` function:

~~~
print('weight in pounds:', 2.2 * weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in pounds: 132.0
~~~
{: .output}

The above command, however, did not change the value of `weight_kg`:

~~~
print(weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
60.0
~~~
{: .output}

To change the value of the `weight_kg` variable, we have to
**assign** `weight_kg` a new value using the equals `=` sign:

~~~
weight_kg = 65.0
print('weight in kilograms is now:', weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in kilograms is now: 65.0
~~~
{: .output}

> ## Python is an **Object-Oriented Programming Language**
>
> Everything in Python, variables, functions, libraries,... _everything_ is an **object**. 
> And all objects are **instances** of **classes** and have **attributes**. 
> These are characteristics of object-oriented programming (OOP).
> * A class has a set of common characteristics, e.g. in biology, "humans" can be thought of as a class.
>   * Classes may contain other classes, e.g., the class "mammals" contains the class "humans".
> * An instance of a class is an object. 
>   * A specific person is an instance of "humans". In OOP, you would be an object within the class "humans".
> * An object has attributes, and different objects in the same class may or may not share attributes.
>   * You may have the attribute "tall" or "short", "young" or "middle-aged" or "old", etc.
> * Additionally, some of the attributes of an object can be procedures the object is capable of - these are called **methods**.
>   * Some of your attributes could be things you can do (i.e., methods), like "juggle" or "ride a bike" or "sing".
>   
> You may be surprised at all the attributes and methods possessed a simple object, 
> like the variable `weight_kg` you defined above. 
> It might seem like a basic floating point number with value `60.0`, and no more.
> But because of the class it belongs to in Python, it is actually so much more. 
> 
> We will look into the characteristics of objects later as we learn more about Python.
> 
{: .callout}


> ## Check Your Understanding
>
> What values do the variables `mass` and `age` have after each statement in the following program?
> Test your answers by executing the commands.
>
> ~~~
> mass = 47.5
> age = 122
> mass = mass * 2.0
> age = age - 20
> print(mass, age)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > 95.0 102
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Sorting Out References
>
> What does the following program print out?
>
> ~~~
> first, second = 'Hopper', 'Grace'
> third, fourth = second, first
> print(third, fourth)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > Grace Hopper
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> > 
> > Who is [Grace Hopper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grace_Hopper){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}?
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

Specify login to Hopper Desktop
The GUI backend for displaying matplotlib plots via X11-enabled ssh session into Hopper. Cannot figure out how to specify an alternative GUI backend or install an alternative.  But it works in the Hopper Desktop!

_episodes/01-intro.md, after:

---
title: Python Fundamentals
teaching: 20
exercises: 5
questions:
- "What basic data types can I work with in Python?"
- "How can I create a new variable in Python?"
- "Can I change the value associated with a variable after I create it?"
objectives:
- "Assign values to variables."
keypoints:
- "Basic data types in Python include integers, strings, and floating-point numbers."
- "Use `variable = value` to assign a value to a variable in order to record it in memory."
- "Variables are created on demand whenever a value is assigned to them."
- "Use `print(something)` to display the value of `something`."
---

## Preparation

For this lesson we will begin using the Python programming language.  
For examples used in class:

1. Log onto the Hopper Desktop using the [browser-based Dashboard](https://ondemand.orc.gmu.edu/), launch a terminal window and create a new directory in your home directory called:
`swc-python`

2. Copy the following two files from `/home/pdirmeye/classes/clim680_2022/` to your new directory:
`python-novice-inflammation-code.zip`
`python-novice-inflammation-data.zip`

3. Unzip the two files
You should see two new folders called `data` and `code` in the `swc-python` directory

4. Load a Python module so that you will have access to the language and its interpreter. 
If you already have a Python environment set up, you may load/use that. 
If you do not or are unsure, you may run the following command:

~~~
$ module load python
~~~
{: .language-bash}

To start an interactive Python session, type:

~~~
$ python
~~~
{: .language-bash}

## Variables

Any Python interpreter can be used as a calculator:

~~~
3 + 5 * 4
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
23
~~~
{: .output}

This is fine, but not very interesting.
To do anything useful with data, we need to assign its value to a _variable_.
In Python, we can **assign** a value to a
**variable**, using the equals sign `=`.
For example, to assign value `60` to a variable `weight_kg`, we would execute:

~~~
weight_kg = 60
~~~
{: .language-python}

From now on, whenever we use `weight_kg`, Python will substitute the value we assigned to
it. In layman's terms, a variable is a name for a value.

In Python, variable names:

 - can include letters, digits, and underscores
 - cannot start with a digit
 - are **case sensitive**.

This means that, for example:
 - `weight1` is a valid variable name, whereas `1weight` is not.
 - `weight` and `Weight` are _different variables_.

## Types of data
Python knows various types of data. Three common ones are:

* integer numbers
* floating point numbers, and
* strings.

In the example above, variable `weight_kg` has an integer value of `60`.
To create a variable with a floating point value, we can execute:

~~~
weight_kg = 60.0
~~~
{: .language-python}

And to create a string, we surround the text with single or double quotes, for example:

~~~
weight_kg_text = 'weight in kilograms:'
~~~
{: .language-python}

## Using Variables in Python
To display the value of a variable to the screen in Python, we can use the `print` function:

~~~
print(weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
60.0
~~~
{: .output}

We can display multiple things at once using only one `print` command:

~~~
print(weight_kg_text, weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in kilograms: 60.0
~~~
{: .output}

Moreover, we can do arithmetic with variables right inside the `print` function:

~~~
print('weight in pounds:', 2.2 * weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in pounds: 132.0
~~~
{: .output}

The above command, however, did not change the value of `weight_kg`:

~~~
print(weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
60.0
~~~
{: .output}

To change the value of the `weight_kg` variable, we have to
**assign** `weight_kg` a new value using the equals `=` sign:

~~~
weight_kg = 65.0
print('weight in kilograms is now:', weight_kg)
~~~
{: .language-python}

~~~
weight in kilograms is now: 65.0
~~~
{: .output}

> ## Python is an **Object-Oriented Programming Language**
>
> Everything in Python, variables, functions, libraries,... _everything_ is an **object**. 
> And all objects are **instances** of **classes** and have **attributes**. 
> These are characteristics of object-oriented programming (OOP).
> * A class has a set of common characteristics, e.g. in biology, "humans" can be thought of as a class.
>   * Classes may contain other classes, e.g., the class "mammals" contains the class "humans".
> * An instance of a class is an object. 
>   * A specific person is an instance of "humans". In OOP, you would be an object within the class "humans".
> * An object has attributes, and different objects in the same class may or may not share attributes.
>   * You may have the attribute "tall" or "short", "young" or "middle-aged" or "old", etc.
> * Additionally, some of the attributes of an object can be procedures the object is capable of - these are called **methods**.
>   * Some of your attributes could be things you can do (i.e., methods), like "juggle" or "ride a bike" or "sing".
>   
> You may be surprised at all the attributes and methods possessed a simple object, 
> like the variable `weight_kg` you defined above. 
> It might seem like a basic floating point number with value `60.0`, and no more.
> But because of the class it belongs to in Python, it is actually so much more. 
> 
> We will look into the characteristics of objects later as we learn more about Python.
> 
{: .callout}


> ## Check Your Understanding
>
> What values do the variables `mass` and `age` have after each statement in the following program?
> Test your answers by executing the commands.
>
> ~~~
> mass = 47.5
> age = 122
> mass = mass * 2.0
> age = age - 20
> print(mass, age)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > 95.0 102
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Sorting Out References
>
> What does the following program print out?
>
> ~~~
> first, second = 'Hopper', 'Grace'
> third, fourth = second, first
> print(third, fourth)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > Grace Hopper
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> > 
> > Who is [Grace Hopper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grace_Hopper){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}?
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}
